Time to move on to CSS Grid so
first of all, why CSS Grid?
Why would we ever wanna use
that Flexbox seem pretty good?
Why would we wanna move on
to a Grid based layout?
First of all, it is built in the CSS
specification, just like Flexboxes, so
it is totally a legit way of laying out
web pages unlike floats, unlike table
based layouts and all of the other hacks
that we've used in the history of CSS.
The other interesting thing about Grid
is that there's no row markup required
in the past we have written a lot of row
markup well as it pertains to Flexbox.
But now with Grid, we don't have
to do that anymore because we can
specify our layouts in two dimensions and
as always,
we're gonna have to remind our parents and
children to make sure that we get
the correct set of properties on the
parents and the children appropriately.
Grid is designed to work in two dimensions
that means we have to think about
not only going across the page and
just the next row on top of each other,
we have to think about items that
are going to span across various rows or
various columns on the page.
So we have to think about that, the last
point here I wanna make is in the first
time I recorded this course and
at that point in time really in 2017,
we talked a lot about how we use Flex for
UI elements and use Grid for major layout.
And that was pretty much the
recommendation that came from the white
wig people from MDN, and so forth, but
I think after four years of people
working with Flexbox and Grid.
I think the better recommendation at
this point in time is to use either
methodology where they
make the most sense, so
rather than trying to dogmatically stick
to Grid for major layout on web pages.
And then Flexbox for
the UI inside of various cells,
what I'm here to tell
you is use what works,
where it works best because there are
strengths and weaknesses to each of these.
And we're gonna dig into a lot of those
today, this is a screenshot of Grid and
Flexbox explained right from the wig
website and as you see here with Flexbox.
We have a series of rows just like we have
seen all through this course one right
after the other and you can have different
numbers of boxes on each of those rows,
but it is still row after
row after row of boxes.
This is what I mean when I say it's one
dimension, all we think about are these
various rows or potentially
the columns but realistically we don't
necessarily use columns in our
layout processes that often.
With Grid we are truly thinking about
going across rows, going across columns
which makes for more interesting types
of layouts if you're old enough to
remember the table based layout days where
we dealt with row spans and call spans.
We're back to that again but
with legit straight up CSS instead of a
hack In HTML the way we used to do it, so
this is the major difference
between these two methodologies.
You need to think very carefully about how
you are going to work in two dimensions
when you're working with Grid, in terms of
the browser support, it's all there now.
Now and you don't need to
worry about that anymore, so
the level 1 specification which is
CSS Grid pretty much as maybe you
are somewhat familiar with it at this
point is supported by all major browsers.
And it's been supported by all major
browsers for some time now, there is a new
type of grid layout called Subgrid,
it's currently under development and
it's only supported by Firefox
at this moment in time.
For that reason I'm not going to
be talking about Subgrid today,
you know there's a lot of excitement
around Subgrid people are very interested
in how Subgrid is going
to change their lives.
We'll see, we'll see and, of course,
the Partial support or no support
is with our usual browser suspects so
any version of Internet Explorer,
older versions of edge, those
are are going to have issues with support.
So pretty much par for the course,
alright, so let's talk a little
bit about the kinds of markup that
we're going to use with Grid and
then the types of CSS,
this is one of the things with Grid.
Whereas Flexbox had just a few
types of properties that we needed
to leverage to make a web page layout,
Grid actually has several
different types of syntax
potentially to do the same thing.
And you can pick one of those along
the way and decide what works best for
you, there are some advantages to
using one kind of syntax sometimes and
other syntaxes that other times.
But that is what I want you to be aware of
that's where a lot of the confusion comes
from because there's so many different
ways to say the same thing with Grid, so
this is what your HTML might look like.
This is for the starting type of syntax
I'm going to lead you through first which
is the line based placement and I'll tell
you what that means in just a moment so
your HTML here looks similar to
what we had with Flexbox before.
There is a parent or
a Grid container there are children or
the Grid items and each one of those
grid items now has its own class,
reason why is because we're going to
have to spell out potentially where
each one of those Grid cells is going
to go with this first type of syntax.
So we set up our CSS very simply,
we tell the wrapper to display Grid and
we can use the gap property here,
now again, if some of you have some
background in grid, we used to say grid
hyphen gap that is no longer a thing.
That has now been displaced by the gap and
the gap property works in both Fexbox and
in Grid, so
if we say just a gap of 10 pixels
that's gonna put a gap horizontally and
vertically all the way around with
these boxes and 10 pixels in this case.
With line base placement, we have
a series of lines, in this case, we're
working with columns, those line, also,
apply to rows, they count like humans,
we start with one and you start to
the outside of your first Grid cell.
That becomes line number one, after that
first Grid cell before the second one,
that's line number two, and
so on across the screen, so
in that first cell there we've said
our grid column goes from one to two.
Our second cell goes from two to three,
our third cell goes
from three to four and
our last cell will go from four to five,
so this is a shorthand here
this is a start and an end.
You could spell these out with grid
hyphen column hyphen, start, grid hyphen,
column hyphen, end, or you can just
use the shorthand that I've used here,
where we're indicating the start and
finish of both of those lines.
Then you can start thinking about
the two-dimensional aspect of it what I
showed you there before was
just a very simple row,
if you are laying this out in
a more complicated grid fashion.
Then we're going to think about
what happens if we have a cell
that goes over several rows or
over several columns then for
example here with the column
one that dot call hyphen one.
It starts at row line number one,
it skips over a line number two,
because that's part of that cell,
and it ends at line number three,
so we're going to say our grid hyphen
row has a value of one slash three.
That is how we go about specifying this,
so as you see with this type of syntax,
we're very, very specific about
where each cell is placed in
space using these types of
numbers it's kind of absoluteish,
where it's saying exactly where we want
each cell here inside of the grid.
There's nothing wrong with that
if you are very particular about
when where things are going to go and
this code is not necessarily
going to be reused somewhere else and
you don't have necessarily a bunch of.
Maybe you have a bunch of press releases,
or a bunch of images, or a bunch of
some other type of content, little chunks
that you wanna display nicely on a page.
This type of syntax is going to be more
difficult to work with under those kinds
of conditions where you don't necessarily
know how many items you need inside
of a grid based layout.
Under those kinds of conditions,
you might work with Flexbox,
much more easily that's kind of
what Flexbox was designed to do or
there are some other grid syntaxes
that are a little bit more flexible,
in terms of where you start and
where you end in this line base syntax.
We'll take a look at that as well,
so as I mentioned,
this is the hard part of Grid,
all these kinds of syntax so
the numbers we just talked about
the lines actually have these numbers
there's a span notation we're
gonna talk about momentarily.
You also have the option of naming your
lines so rather than just going by
the numbers, which to me is very simple
and straightforward you can in fact,
name your lines if that is
an easier approach for you.
And then use those names inside of your
syntax I'm not going to cover that today
but there's lots of places you can look up
what that syntaxies, you can also create
named grid template areas,
which we will cover a little bit later on.
And then of course, there's tons of
shorthand and longhand properties so
this to me, again is one of the most
confusing parts of Grid and
the best way to mitigate this is to take
a look at the CSS tricks page which is
called The Complete Guide to Grid.
And I've given that to you on
today's notes in the website, and
it will give you a link to that
particular page on CSS tricks where
you can look up all of that syntax that's
probably the best way to go with us.
There is another game for practicing your
Grid syntax if you're interested in that,
from the same people who made
Flexbox Froggy we had the CSS Grid garden.
It's a great game, I thoroughly
encourage you to go play it if you wanna
explore all of the different ways of
saying the same thing inside of Grid,
the other interesting part of
this is tracking your parents and
children, the containers and the items.
And so this moves through space so we
can have a single element that starts as
a grid item okay, so somewhere out here
we have a grid container we have this
grid item, it's also a grid container for
the next element inside of it.
That element could be a grid item and
a flex item and a flex container,
and so forth so managing these parents and
children can get very complicated
we're gonna look at an example
like this a little bit later on.
So as I said here so Grid container 1
goes to Grid item 1 It also becomes Grid
container number 2 that might
become a Grid item number 2 and
a Flex can container with
a flex item associated with it.
You can in fact stack these up
in all kinds of crazy ways so
just sort of know that at this point
in time, that this is possible and
by the end of today,
you'll know how to do this.